Middleware abstracts and solves common problems that must always be solved between program layers. In the domain of distributed system, middleware solves common problems between the networking and higher-level application logic layers, like encoding and decoding messages, async/sync communication patterns, automatically routing data, automatically wiring clients and server, handling failed and dead processes, etc. Middleware enables these things through a combination of application services and libraries. Middleware services provide more "actionable" solutions like the routing of data and wiring clients to servers, while middleware libraries provide implementations of common problems like encoding/decoding and async/sync communication patterns. Middleware allows multiple application layers to communicate with each other more abstractly, thus decoupling them. Middleware is generally abstract enough that it can be used in multiple different applications rather than being specially constructed for the specific use case of a unique application.

Middleware is advantageous exactly because it solves a lot of common problems between application layers; an application developer can use a middleware rather than roll their own solution to these problems. Middleware decouples application layers and abstracts their communication between each other. Middleware also has the advantage that it is generally pluggable into a variety of distributed applications and is thus highly reusable. Middleware has some disadvantages as well, including that it may add bloat to a program in terms of code/application size. Middleware APIs also may take some time to learn and use correctly, which is a disadvantage in timely application development. A final disadvantage is that middleware may not provide the exact features an application needs (resulting in the need to roll your own implementations) or have too many features that an application doesn't need (resulting in unnecessary work being done, slowing down the application or system).
